* The VirtualGL Configuration Dialog
{anchor: Config_Dialog}

Several of VirtualGL's configuration parameters can be changed on the fly once
an application has started.  This is accomplished by using the VirtualGL
configuration dialog, which can be activated by holding down the ''CTRL'' and
''SHIFT'' keys and pressing the ''F9'' key while any one of the application's
windows is active.  This displays a dialog box similar to the following:

{img: configdialog.gif}

You can use this dialog to enable or disable frame spoiling or to adjust the
JPEG quality and subsampling.  Changes are reflected immediately in the
application.

	Frame Spoiling :: Clicking on this button will toggle frame spoiling on and
	off.  If the button is highlighted (black), then frame spoiling is enabled.

	Qual Preset: Broadband/T1 :: Clicking on this button will set the JPEG
	quality to 30 and the JPEG subsampling to 4:1:1, settings which will produce
	good performance on broadband connections (but at the expense of image
	quality.)

	Qual Preset: LAN :: Clicking on this button will set the JPEG quality to 95
	and the JPEG subsampling to 4:4:4, settings which will produce perceptually
	lossless image quality (100 Mbit/sec switched LAN recommended.)

	JPEG Quality :: Click and drag the slider to change the JPEG quality to an
	arbitrary value between 1 and 100.

	JPEG Subsampling :: Click on any of the three buttons to change the JPEG
	subsampling.  The highlighted (black) button indicates the current value.

	Close Dialog :: Close the dialog (you can also use the close gadget on the
	dialog window)

 !!! The JPEG quality and subsampling gadgets will only be shown if VirtualGL
 is running in direct mode.  In raw mode, the only setting that can be changed
 with this dialog is frame spoiling.

The ''VGL_GUI'' environment variable can be used to change the key sequence
used to pop up the dialog box.  If the default of ''CTRL-SHIFT-F9'' is not
suitable, then set ''VGL_GUI'' to any combination of ''ctrl'', ''shift'',
''alt'', and one of ''{f1, f2,..., f12}'' (these are not case sensitive.)  e.g.

#Verb: <<---
export VGL_GUI=CTRL-F9
---

will cause the dialog box to pop up whenever ''CTRL-F9'' is pressed.

To disable the VirtualGL dialog altogether, set ''VGL_GUI'' to ''none''.

	!!! VirtualGL monitors the application's X event loop to determine whenever
	a particular key sequence has been pressed.  If an application is not
	monitoring key press events in its X event loop, then the VirtualGL
	configuration dialog might not pop up at all.  There is unfortunately no
	workaround for this, but it should be a rare occurrence.
