* Overview
{anchor: Overview}

VirtualGL is an open source package which gives any Unix or Linux remote
display software the ability to run OpenGL applications with full 3D
hardware acceleration.  Some remote display software, such as VNC, lacks the
ability to run OpenGL applications at all.  Other remote display software
forces OpenGL applications to use a slow software-only OpenGL renderer, to the
detriment of performance as well as compatibility.  The traditional method of
displaying OpenGL applications to a remote X server (indirect rendering)
supports 3D hardware acceleration, but this approach causes all of the OpenGL
commands and 3D data to be sent over the network to be rendered on the client
machine.  This is not a tenable proposition unless the data is relatively small
and static, unless the network is very fast, and unless the OpenGL application
is specifically tuned for a remote X-Windows environment.

With VirtualGL, the OpenGL commands and 3D data are instead redirected to a
3D graphics accelerator on the application server, and only the rendered 3D
images are sent to the client machine.  VirtualGL thus "virtualizes" 3D
graphics hardware, allowing it to be co-located in the "cold room" with compute
and storage resources.  VirtualGL also allows 3D graphics hardware to be shared
among multiple users, and it provides "workstation-like" levels of performance
on even the most modest of networks.  This makes it possible for large, noisy,
hot 3D workstations to be replaced with laptops or even thinner clients.  More
importantly, however, VirtualGL eliminates the workstation and the network as
barriers to data size.  Users can now visualize gigabytes and gigabytes of data
in real time without needing to copy any of the data over the network or sit in
front of the machine that is rendering the data.

Normally, a Unix OpenGL application would send all of its drawing commands
and data, both 2D and 3D, to an X-Windows server, which may be located across
the network from the application server.  VirtualGL, however, employs a
technique called "split rendering" to force the 3D commands from the
application to go to a 3D graphics card in the application server.  VGL
accomplishes this by pre-loading a dynamic shared object (DSO) into the
application at run time.  This DSO intercepts a handful of GLX, OpenGL, and X11
commands necessary to perform split rendering.  Whenever a window is created by
the application, VirtualGL creates a corresponding 3D pixel buffer ("Pbuffer")
on the application server's 3D graphics card.  Whenever the application
requests that an OpenGL rendering context be created for the window, VirtualGL
intercepts the request and creates the context on the corresponding Pbuffer
instead.  Whenever the  application swaps or flushes the drawing buffer to
indicate that it has finished rendering a frame, VirtualGL reads back the
Pbuffer and sends the rendered 3D image to the client.

The beauty of this approach is its non-intrusiveness.  VirtualGL monitors a
few X11 commands and events to determine when windows have been resized, etc.,
but it does not interfere in any way with the delivery of 2D X11 commands to
the X server.  For the most part, VGL does not interfere with the delivery of
OpenGL commands to the graphics card, either (there are some exceptions, such
as its handling of color index rendering.)  VGL merely forces the OpenGL
commands to be delivered to a server-side graphics card rather than a
client-side graphics card.  Once the OpenGL rendering context has been
established in a server-side Pbuffer, everything (including esoteric OpenGL
extensions, fragment/vertex programs, etc.) should "just work."  In most cases,
if an application runs locally on a 3D server/workstation, that same
application will run remotely from that same machine using VirtualGL.  However,
if it were really as simple as that, we could all turn out the lights and go
home.  Most of the time spent developing VirtualGL has been spent working
around "stupid application tricks."

VirtualGL can currently use one of three "image transports" to send rendered 3D
images to the client machine:

{anchor: VGL_Image_Transport}
	\1. VGL Image Transport (Formerly "Direct Mode") :: The VGL Image Transport
	is most often used whenever the X server is located across the network from
	the application server, for instance if the X server is running on the user's
	desktop machine.  VirtualGL uses its own protocol on a dedicated TCP socket
	to send the rendered 3D images to the client machine, and the VirtualGL
	Client application decodes the images and composites them into the
	appropriate X window.  The VGL Transport can either deliver uncompressed
	images (RGB encoded), or it can compress images in real time using a
	high-speed JPEG codec.  It also supports the delivery of stereo image pairs,
	which can be reconstructed into a stereo image by the VirtualGL Client.

#IMG: vgltransport.png
#OPT fmt=latex: w=4cm
#CAP: The VGL Image Transport with a Remote X Server

{anchor: X11_Image_Transport}
	\2. X11 Image Transport (Formerly "Raw Mode") :: The X11 Image Transport
	simply draws the rendered 3D images into the appropriate X window using
	XPutImage() and similar X-Windows commands.  This is most useful in
	conjunction with an "X Proxy", which can be one of any number of Unix remote
	display applications, such as VNC.  These X proxies are essentially "virtual"
	X servers.  They appear to the application as a normal X server, but they
	perform X11 rendering to a virtual framebuffer in main memory	rather than to
	a real framebuffer on a graphics card.  This allows the X proxy to send
	only images to the client machine rather than chatty X-Windows rendering
	commands.  When using the X11 Transport, VirtualGL does not perform any image
	compression or encoding itself.  It instead relies upon an X proxy to encode
	and deliver the images to the client(s).  Since the use of an X proxy
	eliminates the need to send X-Windows commands over the network, this is the
	best means of using VirtualGL over high-latency or low-bandwidth networks.
	The VirtualGL Project provides an accelerated version of VNC, called
	"TurboVNC", which is meant to be used with VirtualGL's X11 Transport.  The
	combination of the two provides a highly-performant remote 3D	solution, even
	on slow networks.  TurboVNC also provides rudimentary collaboration
	capabilities, allowing multiple users to simultaneously interact with the
	same 3D application.

#IMG: x11transport.png
#OPT fmt=latex: w=4cm
#CAP: The X11 Image Transport with an X Proxy

	\3. Sun Ray Image Transport :: The Sun Ray thin client environment from Sun
	Microsystems consists of an X proxy (the Sun Ray Server Software) and a
	series of ultra-thin hardware clients that connect to this proxy over a
	network.  It is similar in concept to VNC, in that a virtual X server is
	created for every user and that only images, not rendering commands,
	are sent to the client.  Unlike VNC, however, the client is not a piece of
	software running on a workstation or laptop.  The client is a fanless,
	diskless little box with only a monitor port, USB ports, a network jack,
	and a smart card slot (used for authentication.){nl} \
	{nl} \
	This environment presents unique challenges to VirtualGL  The first challenge
	is that the Sun Ray 1 and Sun Ray 2 series clients contain relatively slow
	CPUs, so they are not fast enough to decompress JPEG in real time.  The
	second challenge is that Sun Ray servers are generally provisioned to handle
	a lot of simultaneous users, so using VirtualGL's X11 Transport would put
	undue stress on both the Sun Ray servers and the network on which they
	reside.  Thus, Sun Microsystems designed a plugin for VirtualGL which allows
	VGL to compress images using a protocol that can be sent directly to the Sun
	Ray hardware client without having to pass through the Sun Ray server first.
	Since the plugin uses the proprietary Sun Ray image compression technology,
	it is currently closed source, but the binary packages can be downloaded
	for free as part of the [[http://www.sun.com/servers/cr/visualization/get_it.jsp][Sun Shared Visualization]]
	product.  This product also includes VirtualGL, TurboVNC, and other goodies.

#IMG: sunray.png
#OPT fmt=latex: w=4cm
#CAP: The Sun Ray Image Transport

----8<--------------
