* Support for the X Video Extension
{anchor: X_Video_Support}

The X Video extension allows applications to pre-encode or pre-compress images
and send them through the X server to the graphics card, which presumably has
on-board video decoding capabilities.  This approach greatly reduces the amount
of CPU resources used by the X server, which can be beneficial if the X
server is running on a different machine than the application.

In the case of VirtualGL, what this means is that the VirtualGL client machine
no longer has to decode or decompress images from the 3D application server.
It can simply pass the images along to the graphics card for decoding.

VirtualGL supports the X Video extension in two ways:

** YUV Encoding with the VGL Transport

Setting the ''VGL_COMPRESS'' environment variable to ''yuv'' or passing an
argument of ''-c yuv'' to ''vglrun'' enables YUV encoding with the VGL
Transport.  When this mode is enabled, VirtualGL encodes images as YUV420P (a
form of YUV encoding which uses 4X chrominance subsampling and separates Y, U,
and V pixel components into separate image planes) instead of RGB or JPEG.  The
YUV420P images are sent to the VirtualGL Client, which draws them using the X
Video extension.

On a per-frame basis, YUV encoding uses about half the server CPU time as
JPEG compression and only slightly more server CPU time than RGB encoding.  On
a per-frame basis, YUV encoding uses about 1/3 the client CPU time as JPEG
compression and about half the client CPU time as RGB encoding.  YUV encoding
also uses about half the network bandwidth (per frame) as RGB.

However, since YUV encoding uses 4X chrominance subsampling, the resulting
images may contain some visible artifacts.  In particular, narrow, aliased
lines and other sharp features may appear "soft".

** The XV Transport

Setting the ''VGL_COMPRESS'' environment variable to ''xv'' or passing an
argument of ''-c xv'' to ''vglrun'' enables the XV Transport.  The XV Transport
is essentially the same as the X11 Transport, except that it
encodes images as YUV420P and draws them directly to the 2D X server using the
X Video extension.  This is mainly useful in conjunction with X proxies, such
as the Sun Ray Server Software, which support the X Video extension.  The
idea is that if the X proxy is going to have to transcode the image to YUV
anyhow, VirtualGL may be faster at doing this, since it has a SIMD-accelerated
YUV encoder.
